update Observability operations docs (#11357)
kyma-project/kyma: docs/operation-guides/10-backup-kyma.md

---
title: Back up Kyma

> type: Backups

Reviewer: I guess you are still using `Type` only temporarily to be able to render the content?

Author: Correct :) 
It should be obsolete by now

---
The Kyma cluster load consists of Kubernetes [objects](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/kubernetes-objects/) and [volumes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/). 

Kyma relies on a managed Kubernetes cluster for periodic backups of Kubernetes objects to avoid any manual steps.

>**CAUTION:** Automatic backup does not include Kubernetes volumes. Back up your volumes periodically either on demand, or set up a periodic job.

## Object backup

> For example, Gardener uses _etcd_ as the Kubernetes backing store for all cluster data. Gardener runs periodic jobs to take major and minor snapshots of the etcd database to include Kubernetes objects in the backup. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, Gardener uses [etcd](https://etcd.io/) as the Kubernetes backing store for all cluster data. Gardener runs periodic jobs to take major and minor snapshots of the etcd database to include Kubernetes objects in the backup. 
```

> The major snapshot that includes all resources is taken on a daily basis, and minor snapshots happen every five minutes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The major snapshot that includes all resources is taken on a daily basis, while minor snapshots are taken every five minutes. 
```

If the etcd database experiences any problems, Gardener automatically restores the Kubernetes cluster using the most recent snapshot.

## Volume backup

> You should back up your volumes periodically  with the [VolumeSnapshot API resource](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volume-snapshots/#volumesnapshots), which is provided by Kubernetes. You can use your snapshot to provision a new volume pre-populated with the snapshot data or to restore the existing volume to the state represented by the snapshot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should back up your volumes periodically with the [VolumeSnapshot API resource](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volume-snapshots/#volumesnapshots), which is provided by Kubernetes. You can use your snapshot to provision a new volume pre-populated with the snapshot data or restore the existing volume to the state represented by the snapshot.
```

Taking volume snapshots is possible thanks to [Container Storage Interface (CSI) drivers](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/) which allow third-party storage providers to expose storage systems in Kubernetes. For details on available drivers, see the [full list of drivers](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/drivers.html).

> >**TIP:** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**TIP:** 
Learn how to:
```

> >- Learn how to back up and restore individual resources manually or automatically: [Restoring resources using Velero](#tutorials-restore-resources-using-velero)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>- [Back up and restore](#tutorials-restore-resources-using-velero) individual resources manually or automatically using Velero.
```

> >- Learn how to create on-demand volume snapshots, also for cloud providers: [Creating on-demand volume snapshots](#tutorials-create-on-demand-volume-snapshots-for-cloud-providers)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>- [Create on-demand volume snapshots[(#tutorials-create-on-demand-volume-snapshots-for-cloud-providers), also for cloud providers.
```

The major snapshot that includes all resources is taken on a daily basis, while minor snapshots are taken every five minutes. 

If the etcd database experiences any problems, Gardener automatically restores the Kubernetes cluster using the most recent snapshot.

## Volume backup

You should back up your volumes periodically with the [VolumeSnapshot API resource](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volume-snapshots/#volumesnapshots), which is provided by Kubernetes. You can use your snapshot to provision a new volume pre-populated with the snapshot data or restore the existing volume to the state represented by the snapshot.

Taking volume snapshots is possible thanks to [Container Storage Interface (CSI) drivers](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/) which allow third-party storage providers to expose storage systems in Kubernetes. For details on available drivers, see the [full list of drivers](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/drivers.html).

>**TIP:** 
Learn how to:

> >- [Back up and restore](#tutorials-restore-resources-using-velero) individual resources manually or automatically using Velero.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>- [Back up and restore individual resources](#tutorials-restore-resources-using-velero) manually or automatically using Velero.
```

Reviewer: Sorry, I should have marked it this way in the first place. :(

> >- [Create on-demand volume snapshots[(#tutorials-create-on-demand-volume-snapshots-for-cloud-providers), also for cloud providers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>- [Create on-demand volume snapshots](#tutorials-create-on-demand-volume-snapshots-for-cloud-providers), also for cloud providers.
```
